This is an implementation of the Strength Pareto Evolutionary Algorithm
for the ECJ package.

Details of this approach can be found in the following paper:

E. Zitzler, M. Laumanns, and L. Thiele.SPEA2: Improving the Performance
of the Strength Pareto Evolutionary Algorithm. Technical Report 103,
Computer Engineering and Communication Networks Lab (TIK), Swiss Federal
Institute of Technology (ETH) Zurich, Gloriastrasse 35, CH-8092 Zurich,
May 2001. 

ftp://ftp.tik.ee.ethz.ch/pub/people/zitzler/ZLT2001a.ps (Postscript),
ftp://ftp.tik.ee.ethz.ch/pub/people/zitzler/ZLT2001a.pdf (PDF)


ABSTRACT 

The Strength Pareto Evolutionary Algorithm (SPEA) (Zitzler and Thiele
1999) is a relatively recent technique for finding or approximating the
Pareto-optimal set for multiobjective optimization problems. In
different studies (Zitzler and Thiele 1999; Zitzler, Deb, and Thiele
2000) SPEA has shown very good performance in comparison to other
multiobjective evolutionary algorithms, and therefore it has been a
point of reference in various recent investigations, e.g., (Corne,
Knowles, and Oates 2000). Furthermore, it has been used in different
applications, e.g., (La-hanas, Milickovic, Baltas, and Zamboglou 2001).
In this paper, an improved ver-sion, namely SPEA2, is proposed, which
incorporates in contrast to its predecessor a fine-grained fitness
assignment strategy, a density estimation technique, and an enhanced
archive truncation method. The comparison of SPEA2 with SPEA and two
other modern elitist methods, PESA and NSGA-II, on different test
problems yields promising results.


Author of ECJ SPEA package: Robert Hubley, Insitute for Systems Biology
With modifications by Sean Luke, Gabriel Balan, and Keith Sullivan
